Terraria has no formal player class or leveling system. However, weapons can be grouped into four distinct categories based on their damage type – melee, ranged, magic, and summoner. Alongside weapons, several armor sets and accessories operate in tandem to these and potentially can only benefit specific damage types and/or playstyles. Each class has its strengths and weaknesses and has a wide variety of weapons to choose from.

; Melee
The melee class sports high defense and decent crowd control, but many melee weapons have a short attack range, and those that are viable at a distance tend to do lower damage than their close-range counterparts. This encourages melee users to use their defense to tank hits while attacking with their stronger close-ranged weapons. Melee weapons include swords, spears, yoyos, and boomerangs.

; Ranged
Rangers are able to attack from a distance, doing high single-target, piercing, or splash damage. They utilize weapons like bows and guns, as well as thrown objects. Ranged users must constantly acquire ammunition, unless using the Endless Quiver or Endless Musket Pouch or using a ranged weapon that doesn't require ammunition such as the Toxikarp or Paintball Gun.

; Magic
Mages are fragile but highly varied in attack style, often utilizing special mechanics such as homing, lifesteal, and area-of-effect damage. They are held back by reliance on mana, which regenerates very slowly unless the Mana Regeneration buff is in effect. Magic users can often sustain their mana using Mana Stars when fighting many enemies at once, but must use mana potions if they wish to recover mana instantly during boss fights. Most magic weapons are specialized for crowd control, with strong single-target weapons only being unlocked far later in progression.

; Summoner
Summoners deal most of their damage using autonomous minions and/or sentries, and their attacks usually have excellent accuracy. However, most summoning armor sets have low defense in exchange for their high damage potential. Whips are primary weapons that focus summons and increase their damage. While many players do challenges where only summon damage is allowed (Whips, Summon weapons and Mounts), the summoning class was balanced around the idea of the player also using the strongest normal weapon available to them in addition to minions and whips.https://forums.terraria.org/index.php?threads/journeys-end-1-4-official-item-balance-feedback-and-discussion-thread.88978/post-1995397 
Summoners can gain synergistic benefits from hybridizing with other classes:
* Melee provides significantly higher defense when using melee armor pieces on hybrid sets. Melee speed also improves the speed of whips.
* Ranged allows summoners to attack from far greater distances than they can reach with whips, and ranged weapons tend to be strong in general.
* Magic provides a variety of long-ranged attacks, and whips can be used while waiting for mana to regenerate.
* Whips cause minions to switch targets to whichever enemy was last struck, which can be undesirable when fighting bosses that spawn smaller enemies. In these cases, it's often ideal to manually set one's minions to target the boss, and use any weapon except whips. 

Each class gains more complex abilities as the game progresses, enabling more strategic variety in combat. It is advised for players to try out every weapon they find to help determine what works best for them. It is also recommended to use buff potions and healing potions to increase efficiency and survivability in combat (especially during events and boss fights).

In general, it is recommended to focus on gear that benefits one class. Equipment slots are limited, and many armors and accessories only benefit a specific class, especially later into the game. Summoners are an exception to this rule, since summons can deal damage alongside melee/ranged/magic weapons, so summoning gear will always provide a benefit as long as summons are being used. All classes can use at least two minions at all times even without using summoning gear (by using a Bewitching Table), so it's recommended to always utilize these free slots regardless of primary class.

Note that although it is beneficial to only focus on one class between melee/ranged/magic at a time, there is little benefit to specializing in one class over the course of an entire playthrough, and one should strongly consider switching classes if they happen to obtain a powerful weapon from a different class. Off-class weapons can also be useful in situations where one's main class weapons are ineffective (for example, using whips against enemies that can pass through walls where bullets can't reach).

Although not required for anything, it is strongly recommended to purchase a DPS Meter which can be bought by the Traveling Merchant, and to use your weapons on Target Dummies. Always be curious and, whenever possible, try to seek out new weapons or synergies with accessories that you think might be better than your current loadout; never strictly lock yourself to one type of class damage for an entire playthrough (unless you are doing a challenge). This also helps to gauge your progress throughout the entire playthrough.

== Gearing Up ==
Upon entering a world for the first time, any weapon and accessory is better than nothing. This section contains items available from non-evil surface biomes and from the pure underground layer.














  
Mages must increase their mana capacity through the use of 



  




Any and all accessories are useful early game, especially taking modifiers into account for stat increases. This can include informational accessories like the Radar or novelty accessories like the Step Stool, both which can be found when looting surface Chests.








== Pre-Bosses ==
At this stage, focusing on a class can be more beneficial since armor sets have class benefits. Many accessories still buff the player in general rather than one class, so using the most powerful weapon you find rather than one class is still very beneficial. Once you obtain 200 health, there is a chance for the Goblin Army to spawn, which unlocks the Tinkerer's Workshop from the Goblin Tinkerer which is used to upgrade and combine your accessories.
















 or 




The Soulscourge or Vasculash can be reasonably used by early-game summoners to hold them over until they can take on the Jungle and obtain the crafting ingredients needed for the Snapthorn.
Jungle armor is recommended solely due to its fairly high defense and its availability (both the Snapthorn's ingredients and the Feral Claws are found in the Jungle). It offers no other benefits to summoners.At this stage in progression, the most minion slots that summoners can have is three (one innate, one from the Flinx Fur Coat, and one from the Summoning Potion). On higher difficulties, it may be preferable for early-game summoners to avoid the Flinx Fur Coat and focus more on whip damage in favor of higher defense, since the Flinx Fur Coat only offers 1 defense.  



Just the single minion slot provided by this chestpiece is incredibly valuable for hybrid builds, especially considering armor pieces from other sets, such as Fossil armor, can be mixed with the Flinx Fur Coat. Using shimmer, players can shimmer cactus into pumpkins to make Pumpkin armor, which provides a flat 10% increase in damage. This is especially beneficial in the early game when using weapons from multiple classes. However, their comparatively low defense can potentially be a drawback.





== Pre-Skeletron==

After defeating the first bosses, you gain access to more class-specific accessories and armor.






















The Starcrash's meteors do 1.33x the damage of the attack that summoned them, making it particularly effective with high-damage sentries or minions like the Ballista Rod or Imp Staff.On targets that these sentries can reliably hit, both the Houndius Shootius and the Ballista Rod perform phenomenally when combined with the Starcrash. This is because not only do both fire so slowly that when combined with the Starcrash they can summon a meteor on every hit, but they also have high base damage that can be multiplied by the Starcrash's unique effect. or 




 




== Pre-Wall of Flesh ==
Defeating Skeletron provides access to the Dungeon, giving access to Necro armor and new weapons from Dungeon and Shadow Chests.
 





















When considering damage builds specifically centered against the Wall of Flesh, summoners have three main options. The Spinal Tap has a lower range but dishes out higher DPS when either used all-in with the Mushroom Staff or when using minion-mixing. The Starcrash has better range and deals a respectable amount of DPS when used all-in with the Imp Staff.Bee armor is preferable if you are planning to use your minions more often and would like to play a more passive role focusing on dodging more than attacking yourself, but Obsidian armor trades 1 of your minions for +7% additional summon damage, +30% whip range, and +15% speed. 
 or 












== Pre-mechanical bosses ==
At this point in the game, damage bonuses from armor and accessories become more significant, so it is recommended to choose a class to specialize in. Ranger is generally agreed to have the best weapons at this stage. However, melee also improves significantly due to melee armors having significantly higher defense than any other class. Magic is still heavily focused on crowd control, making it an effective class for those who want to take out The Destroyer first. Summoners have their best weapons locked behind Dreadnautilus and Queen Slime. It is recommended to mix your chosen class with summoner if you are running a primarily offensive loadout.

This is also the point where a fully-defensive build begins to diverge from damage builds thanks to the availability of the Flesh Knuckles and Star Veil coupled with greater access to damage accessories, so it is a good time to decide whether you want to run a primarily offensive or defensive loadout and reforge your accessories accordingly.




















For the mechanical bosses, you have a choice between two main whip-summon combinations. The Sanguine Staff pairs well with the Firecracker due to its high base damage getting increased by the Firecracker's explosions, which deal 2.75x the damage of the attack that caused them. The Blade Staff pairs well with the Cool Whip because its fast attack speed and low base damage benefit from a flat damage increase. or 




 





== Pre-Plantera ==
At this point, players are expected to have chosen between melee, ranged, magic, summoning, or a hybrid of summoning and another class. This is also where significant armor variety starts to show up within the same class, with players choosing between Hallowed armor, Chlorophyte armor, and tier 2 Old One's Army armor. For magic and ranged, the choice lies between Hallowed armor (for offensive loadouts in need of a defensive effect) or Chlorophyte armor (for all-out offense). Melee users should use Turtle armor for pure defense, or some combination of Hallowed/Chlorophyte Mask, Monk's Shirt/Squire's Plating, and Squire's Greaves for the highest overall stats. If a reliable source of Defender Medals is not available, full Chlorophyte armor also works for offensive melee sets, and for defensive ranged/magic sets.

As was the case in previous stages, ranged provides the highest long-distance , melee provides the best tanking ability, magic provides the most unique weapon effects, and summoner provides the most effortless mob clearing.



















For Plantera, the same whip-summon combinations apply, but most summoners replace the Sanguine Staff with the Optic Staff after defeating The Twins.The Tavernkeep's armors provide minion and sentry bonuses while also providing significant melee, ranged, and magic bonuses. Hybridization is required to bring out their full potential. or 




The Shield of Cthulhu remains viable well into Hardmode because of its useful dash ability. 





== Pre-Golem ==
With the Hardmode Dungeon and the final version of the Solar Eclipse now available, players have access to a variety of new equipment. Furthermore, any Biome Keys you have obtained are now usable. You could attempt to bypass this stage by killing the Empress of Light, Duke Fishron, or summoning the Frost Moon, but most players will find it easier and more logical to kill Golem first.

The transition from pre-Plantera to post-Plantera comes with a significant improvement to the equipment available, with the most prominent new items being melee weapons (Terra Blade, Vampire Knives) and magic armor (Spectre armor). With the exception of the Terra Blade providing near-endgame levels of power, the classes are otherwise very balanced at this stage.



















 or 




 





== Pre-Lunatic Cultist ==
Equipment from Golem, Martian Invasion, and the final tier of the Old One's Army is now available. Challenging Duke Fishron, Empress of Light, the Pumpkin Moon, and the Frost Moon is also now feasible. This stage marks the availability of the first Hardmode magic weapons that truly excel against single targets. 




Both sets of Beetle armor are viable for different situations. However, the offensive variant is not optimal when using weapons that have their  unaffected by melee speed, such as Vampire Knives.




 or or or




Both the Spectre Mask and Spectre Hood are useful for offense and defense, respectively. Generally speaking, a full set of Spectre armor with the Mask pales in comparison to a mix of Spectre Mask/Spectre Robe/Dark Artist's Leggings due to the set bonus of Spectre Mask being capped at 400 .















== Pre-Moon Lord ==
The armor, accessories, and buffs/potions from the Pre-Lunatic Cultist section should be used.



















You have a choice between two main options. The Stardust Dragon Staff performs well with the Firecracker due to its base damage multiplying effect, while the Terraprisma's fast attack speed makes it work well with the  Constellation due to its relatively high tag damage effect.










== Endgame ==
At this point you are free to use whatever you want, since the Zenith kills everything easily regardless of what equipment you're wearing, and most of the other Moon Lord drops aren't far behind. Since there is no more combat-related content left in the game, the hands-off nature of summoner makes it convenient for those who want to transition from combat to building, terraforming, or other activities.





















For Moon Lord and endgame there are once again two whip-summon combinations. The Stardust Dragon Staff benefits greatly from the Firecracker due to its high base damage and Firecracker multiplying it. But due to the Firecracker's low range, it requires you to get close to enemies and bosses, although Tiki armor can help with this. The Terraprisma benefits from the Possession due to its brisk attack speed benefitting from the high tag damage from the Possession. However, to obtain one you must fight the Empress of Light during daytime, which is an incredibly difficult task as every attack from the boss will one-shot the player during the daytime.









== Other ==

Some equipment sets are not meant for fighting, but for other activities, such as fishing, building and exploring. All equipment is optional and makes it easier to perform the task, but otherwise simply use what is at hand.








The Mechanic NPC unlocks wiring, selling the basic tools. 
Summoner gear is useful for defending against enemies while building.







Summoner gear might prove useful to defend against enemies while fishing. A Shield of Cthulhu can be used without interrupting fishing. The Chum Caster is optimal if you are trying to fish up Blood Moon enemies. The Inner Tube and Mollusk Whistle only provide a fishing bonus while in water, and do not stack with one another. For this reason, the Mollusk Whistle may be preferable due to saving an accessory slot.










Movement accessories





== External links ==
* Jason's Terraria Guide

== Footnotes ==